# Release 23.05 (“Stoat”, 2023.05/??) {#sec-release-23.05}

Support is planned until the end of December 2023, handing over to 23.11.

## Highlights {#sec-release-23.05-highlights}

In addition to numerous new and upgraded packages, this release has the following highlights:

<!-- To avoid merge conflicts, consider adding your item at an arbitrary place in the list instead. -->

- Cinnamon has been updated to 5.6, see [the pull request](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/201328#issue-1449910204) for what is changed.

## New Services {#sec-release-23.05-new-services}

<!-- To avoid merge conflicts, consider adding your item at an arbitrary place in the list instead. -->

- [fzf](https://github.com/junegunn/fzf), a command line fuzzyfinder. Available as [programs.fzf](#opt-programs.fzf.fuzzyCompletion).

## Backward Incompatibilities {#sec-release-23.05-incompatibilities}

<!-- To avoid merge conflicts, consider adding your item at an arbitrary place in the list instead. -->

- `carnix` and `cratesIO` has been removed due to being unmaintained, use alternatives such as [naersk](https://github.com/nix-community/naersk) and [crate2nix](https://github.com/kolloch/crate2nix) instead.

- The EC2 image module no longer fetches instance metadata in stage-1. This results in a significantly smaller initramfs, since network drivers no longer need to be included, and faster boots, since metadata fetching can happen in parallel with startup of other services.
  This breaks services which rely on metadata being present by the time stage-2 is entered. Anything which reads EC2 metadata from `/etc/ec2-metadata` should now have an `after` dependency on `fetch-ec2-metadata.service`

- `services.sourcehut.dispatch` and the corresponding package (`sourcehut.dispatchsrht`) have been removed due to [upstream deprecation](https://sourcehut.org/blog/2022-08-01-dispatch-deprecation-plans/).

- The EC2 image module previously detected and automatically mounted ext3-formatted instance store devices and partitions in stage-1 (initramfs), storing `/tmp` on the first discovered device. This behaviour, which only catered to very specific use cases and could not be disabled, has been removed. Users relying on this should provide their own implementation, and probably use ext4 and perform the mount in stage-2.

- The EC2 image module previously detected and activated swap-formatted instance store devices and partitions in stage-1 (initramfs). This behaviour has been removed. Users relying on this should provide their own implementation.

- Qt 5.12 and 5.14 have been removed, as the corresponding branches have been EOL upstream for a long time. This affected under 10 packages in nixpkgs, largely unmaintained upstream as well, however, out-of-tree package expressions may need to be updated manually.

- Disk layout in NixOS tests has changed when using bootloaders: instead of two disks `/dev/vda` and `/dev/vdb`, there is only a unified `/dev/vda` with multiple partitions.
  This require you to change `/dev/vdc` to `/dev/vdb` and so on if you were using `emptyDiskImages` which creates disks in order, as `/dev/vdb` has disappeared, every disk
  has to start over from `/dev/vdb` rather than `/dev/vdc`, see the [#203641 PR in nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/203641) to learn about examples for your migration.
  In addition, `virtualisation.rootDevice` option was introduced and should be used instead of `virtualisation.bootDevice` in many cases.

- The `nix.readOnlyStore` option has been renamed to `boot.readOnlyNixStore` to clarify that it configures the NixOS boot process, not the Nix daemon.

## Other Notable Changes {#sec-release-23.05-notable-changes}

<!-- To avoid merge conflicts, consider adding your item at an arbitrary place in the list instead. -->

- The module for the application firewall `opensnitch` got the ability to configure rules. Available as [services.opensnitch.rules](#opt-services.opensnitch.rules)

<<<<<<< HEAD
- `services.mastodon` gained a tootctl wrapped named `mastodon-tootctl` similar to `nextcloud-occ` which can be executed from any user and switches to the configured mastodon user with sudo and sources the environment variables.
=======
- QEMU test architecture supports running System Management Enforcement (SMM), useful to lock down UEFI authenticated variables.
  At the moment, it seems to prevent any change to UEFI platform, breaking disk production and tests, if enabled.

- `nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix` can now mutate EFI variables, run user-provided EFI firmware or variable templates.
  As a result, NixOS tests have better support of UEFI platforms tests such as SecureBoot tests.
>>>>>>> 07da1119d5f (nixos/doc: move release notes from 22.11 to 23.05)

- A new `virtualisation.rosetta` module was added to allow running `x86_64` binaries through [Rosetta](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/apple-silicon/about-the-rosetta-translation-environment) inside virtualised NixOS guests on Apple silicon. This feature works by default with the [UTM](https://docs.getutm.app/) virtualisation [package](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=unstable&show=utm&from=0&size=1&sort=relevance&type=packages&query=utm).

- Resilio sync secret keys can now be provided using a secrets file at runtime, preventing these secrets from ending up in the Nix store.

- The `unifi-poller` package and corresponding NixOS module have been renamed to `unpoller` to match upstream.
